>> David Khourshid: There's three
essential diagrams that I think that
are important for everyone to learn and
to use in their application.
Again, we're not going
to be going full uml.
There's many different diagram types,
but there's three in particular that
really help you think about the incidental
complexity in your application.
The first is entity relationship diagrams.
Now some of you might have worked
with this before in databases.
And the point of this kind of diagram is
to model your data, so documents your
data model and the relationship between
the different entities in your data.
So for example, if we're creating
a booking system, we might have a user.
Of course most apps have users.
We might have flights as well,
where this is just a raw list of flights
data that we have, and also hotels too.
And then we have bookings.
Now this is where we get into
primary keys and foreign keys.
But all that means is that
this entity belongs to or
is related to another entity.
So in this case, a booking might
be related to a specific flight or
a specific hotel.
And there's also the concept of
relationships where something can be
related to something else and there's a
different degree to which they're related.
So one thing can have many
of the other thing or
you could have a many to
many relationship as well.
There's just different ways
of modeling your data.
Now, I wouldn't say that you should use
a strict tool or framework for doing this.
Just list out all of the different
entities you have and put it down.
Put down all of the properties and also
put down how they relates to each other.
So the main point I want to make here
with entity relationship diagrams is
that it's not strictly for databases.
It also really helps you model the data
in your front end application too.
My preferred tool for this,
I really like using dbdiagram IO.
It's a very simple tool to use and
it has a nice,
it has a nice DSL over here
which again very simple.
You have different entities
which they call tables.
I'll zoom in a little bit here.
Then you can model
the different properties and
the different relationships
between each of the entities.
You could drag it around and
you could include this as a visual in your
application just to show these are all
of the different bits of data that
we're going to be representing and, and
this is how they all connect together.
So the second tool, or sorry,
the second kind of diagram
that I really enjoy using
is sequence diagrams.
So if I go down here, sequence diagrams,
they document the flow between
different parts of your application.
So let's Say that you're searching for
flights or something like that.
You have the UI and
then you have also a flight search.
It could be a service or
something like that.
But the idea is that your UI needs to
communicate with this flight search,
which can be represented
by an async function.
But the point is we're sending data from
one actor that we call to another actor,
and that actor might send,
hopefully might send data back.
And then in the flow of our application,
different actors are going
to be talking to each other.
So let's say that we have an example,
a travel booking flow.
The UI might call a FlightsearchService,
so
that again async function and
then that will return results.
And then once that happens, our UI
will now call a different service and
then it will show options,
then we will pick one of those options.
And then in the UI we might be
talking to our own applications API,
which can be a different type of actor,
where we would create a booking,
update the booking, delete it, et cetera.
So just being able to document those
interactions between different actors
is really going to help clarify how the
different parts of your application work,
especially when it comes to what happens
outside of your react components.
Now, again, making a sequence diagram,
just like making an entity relationship
diagram, it doesn't require you to whip
out a whiteboard or a diagramming tool.
This is something that you could
do just in plain text like this.
If you do want to use a tool,
I really recommend swimlanes.
Swimlanes is a very easy to use tool
that again, it has its own dsl.
It's very expressive.
You could change the names
of the actors over here and
it updates immediately, some message here.
You could also add notes and
things and you could share and
export these diagrams and
use it within your own code base.
Now the third one, sort of my specialty
again, I have lots of courses on,
on state machines, but
it's the state's diagram.
So this documents,
what happens inside of your application.
So it's not really about sequence diagrams
where one actor is talking to another
actor, but instead it is the behavior of a
single thing, which I like to call actors.
So for example, when we're talking
about this flight's booking flow,
a state diagram might show you
the different steps of it.
So just to demonstrate here,
if we go to states new,
let's make a blank canvas over here
we might have a flight booking flow,
where first it will be flightsearch, and
then we'll have our flight results and
then we might have the the hotel search,
once we pick one.
So this is select flight.
So then we search for a hotel and then
on results we have our hotel results and
then we're going to go to
a confirmation screen.
So when we select a hotel
we'll go to review screen.
And then let's say that just in this
example, let's say that this is
where we make our payments,
then we go to a confirmation screen.
So looking at this, it might seem pretty
linear, it might seem pretty simple.
And also I want to ask,
are you all familiar with state machines?
A little bit?
Okay, so for those watching,
if you're not,
a state machine consists of
basically three main things.
We have the initial states and
all of these states over here.
And these represents,
they could be different screens,
different modes of your application,
or just different pages.
When you're working on multi step forms or
flows like that,
it's easy to imagine each one
of those steps as a state.
Then we have transitions.
Transitions are what cause one
state to go to another state.
So let's say that we have our flight
results and we select a flight.
Now we're going to transition
to the hotel search page.
And so that's what these are,
these are events.
Events cause state transitions.
So the reason that this is useful is,
I mean over here it might be simple.
You might be looking at this and thinking,
why can't I just write an array of steps,
words like flight search, flight results,
hotel search, hotel results, review and
confirmation.
And that's because especially
as your app grows in features,
it never remains this simple.
So for example,
let's say that we want to go back.
Even the simple act of going back.
Now this becomes a directed graph
instead of a nice linear structure.
Some of you might be thinking,
okay, this is a double linked list.
But still no,
overall it's a directed graph.
And then same with hotel search.
We could go back and say, okay, we
actually want to see the flight results.
Again, same thing here.
We could go back and then review.
Of course, we could go back.
And then, this is a key point and
why I'm doing this.
When we made the confirmation,
should we be able to go back?
Probably not.
So that's why it's important to
explicitly model these dates.
And in the review too,
we might decide that we want to for
instance change our hotel search.
So change hotel over here.
Or we might want to
also change our flight.
So we might want to go back to
the flight search over here.
And now, hopefully you could see that
this becomes really a directed graph.
It's no longer A links list.
It's no longer a doubly links list,
it's no longer a simple array of steps.
But instead this state diagram or
flow diagram documents all of the
different paths that you have to consider.
We could just go through each one and
see just all of the different
paths that can happen.
This is useful not only for modeling
your application logic, but also for
just modeling how you
test your application,
whether you're doing it manually or,
or you're writing end to end tests.
So it becomes very clear to see, okay,
here's all of the different things that
we could do when we're in each state.
Now, state machines and state diagrams
are a really great tool for thinking.
They are not something that you
necessarily need to include in your entire
code base.
But again, just being able to document
the flows are going to, you know,
just pay dividends in
your state management.
And also you don't necessarily need to
just go and diagram these state machines.
What I like to do sometimes is just
write out the different states.
So I might say, like starting out here,
this is what the user sees.
We might not have any data yet, but
then they'll fill a form in search and
then we will kick off a flight API call
and then we're searching for flights.
So basically we're documenting
each of the screens that we see or
each of the steps, and we're also
documenting what can happen in each step.
Those are the two main important things
when you're documenting these state
diagrams, what state you're in and
what can happen in each state.
So any questions before we
move on to the exercise on
these three different diagram types?
>> Speaker 2: James in the chat just says
he's definitely going to take the state
machine approach on his next project.
>> David Khourshid: That's awesome.
So taking the state machine approach on
your next project is a really good idea.
Again, it's not something where you
have to tell everyone to use XDATA or
to refactor everything as a state machine.
Just documenting these flows
goes a really, really long way.
Someone said we're close
to the X date topic here.
And yeah, all of this, it is influenced
from me thinking about state machines,
state charts and working on X dates, but
we're not going to be talking about
X date specifically in this workshop.